In this chapter we will learn How can we use bitwise
XOR to solve some problems in linear time.
Using XOR operator
We can solve many interesting problems. Before getting started with
problems, let's quickly understand
the two main properties of XOR. The property one is
XOR of the two same numbers will be zero
For example, let us XOR five and five
First write five in the binary form which is 0101
Let us calculate five XOR five
So what is XOR gate's functionality? If two bits are
equal it will return zero.
And if the bits are not equal it will return one.
So here the output of five XOR five will
be 0000. So if we exhort to same numbers the
final output will be zero. The second property is,
if we XOR a number with zero we will get
the same number back
For example let us XOR five and zero. The binary form of five
is 0101 and the binary form of zero is 0000
If we calculate five XOR zero it will be
0101 which is five again.
So the second property is if we XOR a
number with zero
We will get the same number back. Using these properties
of XOR we can solve some interesting problems which
involve eliminating the same numbers
For example, let us take this problem statement given an
array of numbers but every number appears twice except one
number
We need to find that one odd occurring number
Let's take the array of numbers as 5 5 3 3 7 7 4.
Here the output will be four because the numbers five, three and
seven appear twice.
But the number four appears only once.
So can we solve this problem using XOR property?
Yes XORing the same number will become zero
So if we XOR all the numbers, 5 5 will cancel out
3 3 will cancel out and similarly 7 7 will cancel out
and become zero.
Next XORing a number with zero will give the
same number
So all the even occurring numbers will cancel out and
it becomes zero
Finally zero XOR four will give the same number four.
So using bitwise XOR we can solve these
kind of problems which involve finding one odd occurring number
two odd occurring numbers etc.
From the next videos we will solve the
problems using bitwise XOR pattern.